---
title: "Chapter 2: Event Segmentation"
slug: event-segmentation
author: Sulaiman Ahmed
date: 2025-07-15
categories: [methods, analysis]
image: /posts/welcome/thumbnail.jpg
note: "How continuous experience is parsed into discrete rememberable events."
tag: methods
order: 2
---
# 2.1 Introduction
Humans tend to describe situations from past experiences in the form of events. a series of ordered episodes that starts at a point in time. This is evident in folk stories for example, the journey of a protagonist through the struggles and achieving a goal that was defined either at the beginning of the story or emerged during the survival mode. Events plays an important role in storytelling and in storing and recalling them from the episodic memory. Newtson (1973) performed two experiments to investigate the role event segmentation plays in the confidence of remembering those events (Newtson, 1973). In the first experiment, participants viewed 5 minutes long behaviour sequence video (e.g. filling a questionnaire, lighting a cigarette) and they were asked to segment the behaviour into fine-units of action or as gross-units of action when "one meaningful action ends and a different one begins". Trait ratings were used across 3 dimensions (intellectual, social, and evaluative), confidence in those ratings, attribution tasks, and the number of perceived actions. Results showed that participants who segmented the video into fine-units were more confident in their impressions compared to participants who segmented the same video at a gross-units level. While this experiment provided an evidence that finer perception of behaviour shows more confident judgements, it could also mean that one sub-group of participants is more engaged than the other. In the second experiment, Newtson (1973) tested whether unexpected behaviour increases behaviour unitization. Participants viewed 5 minutes video of a male student completing a model of molecule. In another video that has the same task, the actor removes his shoe and rolls up his pants – as an unexpected action – then continue with his task. Results showed that those who watched the video with unexpected behaviour used more units per minute in the remaining 3 minutes compared to those who viewed the video without the act. This experiment supported the idea that unitization is more dynamic than we think and that it is correlated with the situation and the rate of change.

In another seperate study, Newtson and Engquist, (1976) investigated how people perceive events and tested whether participants can detect deleted frames at behavioural boundaries (breakpoints) compared to within ongoing actions (non-breakpoints). Participants were asked to press a button whenever they feel there are missing frames (either 4, 8, or 12 missing frames). Results of this experiment showed that detection of deletions was far more accurate at breakpoints, supporting the view that a behaviour is perceived in units, and breakpoints are perceptually salient (Newtson & Engquist, 1976). In a second experiment, Newtson and Engquist, (1976) tested with a different group of participants whether breakpoints are more comprehensible than non-breakpoints. Videos were eight of the nine 30-set action sequences employed in the previous experiment. Breakpoint and non-breakpoint intervals were the same ones used in the previous experiment. Three breakpoints and three non-breakpoints were selected from each sequence, yielding 48 items, 24 of each type. A single frame from the centre of the interval was extracted and mounted as a slide. Slides were presented with a projector programmed to advance every 5 seconds. Participants were asked "How comprehensible were the three slides taken as a whole". Their answers were registered on a scale of 1-9, ranging from "not understandable" to "very understandable" and they were asked to give a summarised description of the behaviour and indicate whether the order of the slides was correct and, if not, give the correct order. The results revealed that participants accurately described scenes around breakpoints than non-breakpoints. They also reported mean score of intelligibility close to that of the pre-test group who viewed the continuous behaviour sequences. Additionally, their judgement of slide order was mostly correct compared to the other group (non-breakpoints). These results confirmed the theory of breakpoints forming the basis of the perceptual units of behaviour and disproving the concept of continuous flow. Lastly, Newtson and Engquist, (1976) tested whether recognition memory is better around breakpoints than non-breakpoints. In this experiment, a series of films were prepared, divided in half, and marked by a pre-test group. Breakpoints and non-breakpoints were identified, extracted, and mounted as slides. Participants were asked to watch one-half of each film and judge whether or not the slides drawn from both film halves came from the film they watched. Answers were recorded as yes-no judgments and rated their confidence on a 0-3 scale. Outcomes highlighted that participants better remembered and recognised slides for breakpoints, a further signal detection analysis was performed to confirm findings are not due to response bias, revealing breakpoints are more memorable and perceptually distinctive compared to non-breakpoints. This study, supported by the previous Newtson (1973) study marked a starting point for the research in behavioural psychology on how perceptual units of an ongoing behaviour are organised. As we will see throughout this chapter, many studies in subsequent years built their theories on Newtson findings and adapted the unitization task for measuring event perception, including the Event Segmentation Theory (EST), Temporal Order Memory (TOM), and Theory of Event Coding (TEC).

# 2.2 Event Segmentation Theory (EST)
The empirical foundations Newtson established in the 1970s have shaped our understanding of how perceivers segment behaviour into variable-sized units and the role of breakpoints in recognition and remembering of events and actions. Those breakpoints were shown to be comprehensible, and resistant to noise (Newtson, 1973; Newtson & Engquist, 1976). Those features are now central to event segmentation theory (EST) developed by Zacks et al. (2007). Event Segmentation Theory (EST) states that people segment ongoing activity into meaningful events to predict what happens next, this segmentation is driven by a prediction error increase. The representations of the states of the world in the near future is particularly important, which is called perceptual predictions (Zacks & Swallow, 2007). According to the theory, those perceptual predictions are of high value as they allow humans to anticipate the future and to plan actions appropriately rather than standing still without any reaction to an incoming stimuli. According to Zacks et al. (2007), EST alongside other perception theories (e.g., TEC) share three important notions or features that are core to its functionality (see figure 2.1):
1. Hierarchy: A perception is a hierarchical process in which sensory information is transformed into representations that form the basis of an action (e.g., morning, breakfast, let's make coffee).
2. Recurrent: Later processing stages affect the flow of processing in earlier stages. (shower, prepare breakfast, drink coffee, then head to work, etc.).
3. Cyclical: Perceptual predictions are compared to what actually happens and these comparisons are used to guide the ongoing processing. Events share common features, they range from few seconds (e.g. eating a strawberry) to few hours (e.g. going for a hike) (Zacks & Swallow, 2007). They are directed toward a goal, for example the goal of a wedding is to formalise a union or lack a goal and animate agents (Zacks & Swallow, 2007). Thus, taxonomic boundaries are fuzzy. The spatial and temporal boundaries are fuzzy and can be difficult to tell where or when one event ends and another begins (Zacks & Swallow, 2007). EST concerns the core category of an event ranging from few seconds to tens of minutes.

## 2.2.1 Architecture
EST proposes a dynamic architecture in which perception, prediction, and memory interact actively. At it's core, it processes a set of sensory representations and generate a set of perceptual predictions (Zacks & Swallow, 2007). Sensory inputs in the visual region for example could be basic information about brightness, colour, and some preliminary edge detections. Those inputs are then transformed to multi-modal representations with semantic encoding such as object location, and motion trajectory. The perceptual processing is guided by a set of representations called event models that bias processing in the perceptual stream (Zacks & Swallow, 2007). Figure (2.2) below depicts EST's architecture and its underlying processes. When an incoming information is passed through the "sensory input" from the environment (such as sights, sounds, or movements), they first pass into the perceptual processing step where extractions of relevant features happen (motion, shape, or face expressions), and organises them into patterns. This information is then passed into an actively updated event model, brain's best guess about "what is happening now". It integrates both incoming perceptual data and stores knowledge about events, known as event schemata. The event model, with the support of event schemata generates predicted future inputs. The system then compares those predictions against incoming sensory data. If there is a big difference in what is predicted, an "error detection" mechanism is activated, triggering a model reset and opening a gate for direct sensory input to update the event model which allows the system to align it's representations and defining new boundary for this event. When this happens, the end of one event is marked and the beginning of another event is registered.

## 2.2.2 Causes and consequences
Imagine you're sitting in a cafe, enjoying a cup of coffee and reading a book. Suddenly, someone trips over and falls down on the ground. Your attention immediately changes and sharpens quickly, your immediate reaction is trying to help. You notice their body posture and movement as they are grabbing their belongings and standing up. Few seconds earlier you were not aware of the people moving around you and suddenly you're now tracking - to some extent - who is around you. These series of actions now feels a distinct episode. One you can easily recall and describe later to your friends. This mundane interaction shows the core dynamics of event segmentation. Your environment was perceived passively in the background (The background music, barrister calling out names of orders, cars moving outside), the moment something unexpected happens, your prediction error increased causing your brain to mark an event boundary. This disruption in prediction causes a shift in attention. Despite being a non-threatening and not of an emergency level event, you'd still remember it vividly due to the perceptual system mechanism that considered that event as meaningful. Figure 2.3 shows schematic depiction of EST with annotations drawn from our example. The figure shows how EST responds to our example from sensory inputs to detecting errors and opening the gate for information to flow into event models and retrieving related information from the event schemata. This example shows causes of segmentation: perceptual change, unexpected action, or goal shift and reveals some of the consequences: attention shift, memory encoding, and reorganised storage of the experience.

# 2.3 Event perception, segmentation, and memory
Perception and memory are studied in the context of discrete pictures or words. Real-life experience, however, consists of a continuous stream of perceptual stimuli (Baldassano et al., 2017). In this section we aim to shed a light on some of the key differences and roles of perception and segmentation in memory encoding. Event perception, refers to the set of mechanisms by which an organism represents the activity in which it is immersed (J. M. Zacks, 2020), and it is characterised by the segmentation of ongoing experience into meaningful events. Event segmentation, on the other hand, refers to the mechanisms by which the brain segments ongoing activity into meaningful events; also sometimes used to refer to tasks intended to measure these mechanisms (J. M. Zacks, 2020). EST considers segmentation as a domain-general cognitive-control mechanism (Zacks et al., 2007). First, event segmentation controls the allocation of cognitive resources over time, and second, event segmentation controls the updating of information in working memory by resetting the event models (Zacks et al., 2007).

In the broader context, the brain segment experiences we perceive into discrete events, a fundamental step to comprehend, act, and recall past experiences. The segmentation of those events are not arbitrary, they represent changes in goals, and often sensory inputs (Zacks et al., 2007). Perceptual segmentations are used to build memory units. When we remember, we rebuild scenes that are shaped by how we initially stored them (J. M. Zacks, 2020).

Newtson and Engquist, (1976) conducted one of the earliest studies on event perception and memory. The authors displayed movies of everyday scenes, and later a series of still slides were shown to participants. Those slides were taken from pre-defined event boundaries, non-boundaries, and unseen control movies. Participants were asked to identify which slide seen before and which are not. Results from this experiment revealed higher accuracy for slides taken from event-boundaries (Newtson & Engquist, 1976). In another study by Schwan et al. (2000) investigated the effect of film cuts to natural event boundaries, which were identified by experts who watched the unedited films and pressed a button whenever they felt an event ended and another started. Film cuts were placed around the natural boundaries identified earlier, and another set of film cuts were placed at non-breakpoints. Participants watched one film version while pressing a button to segment activity units, then completed recall protocols (Schwan et al., 2000). The two film variants, which differed in the position of cuts in relation to breakpoints, did not lead to any substantial differences, either in the overall number of segmentations during the film presentation or in the overall completeness and detail of subsequent recall. Nevertheless, in the case of cuts at non breakpoints, a significant negative correlation between the number of segmentations and the completeness of the recall was found (Schwan et al., 2000). The main finding from this study is the participants recalled significantly more actions at intervals with breakpoints than at intervals with non breakpoints (see page 5, results, Schwan et al. 2000).

Results supporting better remembered scenes at event-boundaries than non boundaries supports EST's claim that event segmentation is a cognitive control mechanism (Zacks et al., 2007). According to theory, working memory representations (the event models) are updated selectively at those points in time that correspond to perceptual event boundaries, which means that perceptual information at those times receives increased processing than perceptual information from other points in time (Zacks et al., 2007). In our view, what makes EST special is the generalisation across domains, it applies not only to visual processing alone, but also to auditory (i.e., hearing) and narratives. Additionally, the gating mechanism that clears away outdated memory attributions and updates event models when a salient change is detected correlates with observed phenomena in life (e.g., If you drive the same route to work everyday for a month, that's almost 20 journeys condensed to one "memory unit", unless there's one day where you stopped by to help a stranger on a rainy day or you made a car accident).

# 2.4 Event segmentation and time perception
Time is an essential dimension of our daily activities, from the way we move and travel to our productivity at work and school. Being able to tell time is also advantageous for gathering spatial information (Buhusi & Meck, 2005). For decades, researchers and psychologists tried to explain the passage of time in humans and animals through an internal clock model such as the Pacemaker-Accumulator Model (PA), a system that explains behavioural and biological data. PA is governed by three-processes: a pacemaker that generates rhythmic neural activity mimicking a "tick" in the clock, an accumulator that accumulates signals from the pacemaker, serving as an internal representation of elapsed time, and a threshold that controls the subjective experience of time (Treisman, 1963). Despite the biological plausibility of the PA model (Plenz & Kital, 1999), there was no direct neurobiological evidence that explains the interval timing in the brain (Buhusi & Meck, 2002). Additionally, the PA model lacked an explanation of how attention, memory, emotion, and time interact with each other (Buhusi & Meck, 2005).

Other models such as Scalar Expectancy Theory (SET) presented by Gibbon (1977) suggests animals use an internal clock to measure durations. This theory follows Weber's Law, where the variability of time estimates is proportional to the interval being timed (i.e., scalar variability) (Gibbon, 1977). This model was criticized for its reliance on the pacemaker-Accumulator model which is mechanistic and is not grounded in known biology (Staddon & Higa, 1999). Furthermore, the memory of durations component doesn't explain how animals update their timing representations across trials (Staddon & Higa, 1999). Staddon and Higa (1999) presented an alternative to SET that is based on principles of memory dynamics derived from the multiple-time-scale (MTS) model of habituation proposing a pacemaker-free theory that can account for a wider range of data compared to SET (Staddon & Higa, 1999).

A number of important characteristics such as age-related differences and domain-specific biases and scaling-up intervals to long durations are not addressed by the internal clock models (Fountas et al., 2017). One of the leading alternative approaches is network-state-dependent (SDN) model of time perception. This framework proposes that neural circuits are inherently capable of temporal processing due to the complexity of cortical networks combined with time-dependent neuronal properties (Karmarkar & Buonomano, 2007). Results from this study showed that within the millisecond range, timing does not rely on clock-like mechanisms or a linear metric of time (Karmarkar & Buonomano, 2007). This approach however is more applicable to motor systems and it is unclear how it can accmodate for longer intervals (Roseboom et al., 2019). In their "clockless" conference paper Fountas et al. (2017) presented for the first time a novel deep neural network architecture that is able to make accurate time estimations of a given episode without the need for internal, clock-like processes (Fountas et al., 2017). In this architecture, AlexNet, a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) is used to classify objects in the frames. In the next chapter we will present the architecture of AlexNet in more details and go through the components used in our event segmentation model.
