---
title: "Chapter 7: Discussion"
slug: discussion
author: Sulaiman Ahmed
date: 2025-10-01
categories: [discussion, conclusion]
image: /posts/welcome/thumbnail.jpg
note: "Integrated interpretation, limitations, and future directions."
tag: discussion
order: 7
---
# 7.1 Summary
The central aim of this study was to identify whether participants recall scenes around event-boundaries better than scenes that didn't belong to an event-boundary (i.e., non-event gap). To do this, we outlined a framework that combines 3 studies: deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), perception census, and fMRI. Including transformation of data to be aligned amongst all three datasets, estimation of event boundaries, and finding time-point agreements to drive the final "event-boundary" and "non-event gap" sub-clips.

## 7.1.1 City scenes
Our results show that predicting city scenes at the event-boundary is more systematic across participants. This is evident through the low vocabulary diversity and uneven spread (shown in figure 6.25), which means the 22 participants agreed on using vocabulary to predict the next 1-2 seconds where an event-boundary and salient perceptual change recorded. Furthermore, the analysis of words that appeared only once in the corpus (shown in table 6.4) support this claim, only 21% of the total tokens appeared once, in a corpus merged from 22 corpora. Upon analysing verbs used in predicting event-boundary scenes, a noticeable difference is observed in verb frequencies. Top 5 verbs are "walk", "turn", "stand", "look", and "cross", which suggest actions are dominated in describing those scenes compared to describing scenes at the gaps where verbs like "walk", "stand", and "look" are also common but occur at lower frequencies compared to the event-boundary case. Additionally, verbs like "don't" and "remember" appear in the non-event gap descriptions which suggest uncertainty and speculation (see Appendix A.3). As we have seen in results (section 6.5) Participants agreed on (repetitive vocabulary resulting in: lower hapax richness, lower TTR, low diversity and uneven spread) predicting the next scene at event-boundary and somewhat uncertain, and speculative descriptions when predicting the next scene at gaps (broad vocabulary and shorter corpora resulting in higher hapax richness, higher TTR, high diversity and even spread). We take these results as evidence that event-boundary corpus is better remembered than non-event gaps. It should be stressed here that our analysis merged participants' corpora into one big list and hence the repetition of descriptions and "agreement" unlike the resulted list of no-event gaps which contained more diverse and less repetitive vocabulary "less agreement".

## 7.1.2 Office scenes
Vocabulary distributions Vs. Gini coefficient values of text responses predicting office scenes were opposite of that in city scenes. Office event-boundary responses are positioned in the first quarter in figure 6.25 which represents high diversity and even spread across the corpus, which translates to diverse responses across participants that predicted the next scene in a subtle office environment. It is interesting to see however that responses describing non-event gaps are placed in quarter 4, a low diversity and uneven spread of vocabulary throughout the corpus, which is the same quarter of city event-boundary responses. Despite the distinct distribution of vocabulary between event-boundary and non-event gap predictions, their hapax richness, Type-Token Ratio (TTR) show extremely close values. Making it difficult to draw a lexical line between the two. The reason for this might be the similarity across scenes filmed in the office, and visual cues are less salient and therefore difficult to distinguish. Unlike city scenes where visual and contextual cues can be extracted –stored– and recalled later.

It's interesting to observe that the top words used in office event-boundary predictions and non-event gap predictions (Appendix A.2) use similar object-action cues. For example ("chair","sit") were frequently used in office-EV, and ("person","walk") in office non-EV proving our earlier hypothesis that less distinct cues are available and participants lean to use what is available as anchors for later reference them from memory and it is unclear whether those cues are recalled or best-guesses (general knowledge of how office look like).

# 7.2 Related work
The idea that humans remember better at event-boundaries is not new. There are other studies that have also performed investigation of event segmentation on human remembering and recalling patterns (J. Zacks & Trversky, 2001; Speer & Zacks, 2005; Radvansky & Zacks, 2017; Mariola et al., 2022). Our study uses the power of computational modelling, salient events driven by voxel-wise changes in BOLD, and human segmentation of events, all together in one framework. Our effort builds on the work of researchers that used the accumulation of salient events to estimate time durations (Fountas et al., 2017; Roseboom et al., 2019; Fountas et al., 2021; Sherman et al., 2022).

As in our study, Mariola et al. (2022), brought together the research of event segmentation and time perception in one framework. Mainly, the study investigated methods of obtaining event-boundaries, and how it perform in relevance to human event annotations. While we used fMRI-based and AlexNet as an artificial neural network, Mariola et al. (2022) used Greedy State Boundary Search algorithm on EEG-based data, and MobileNetV2 to detect changes in visual features. The video stimuli were naturalistic video clips (between 1 and 64 seconds) recorded in Brighton, UK, and has three types of scenes: city streets, campus/countryside, and office environments (Mariola et al., 2022). Findings revealed that event boundaries from the model-based and the EEG data-driven approach performed similarly well, and were both indistinguishable from human provided boundaries in at least 89% of cases examined. While GSBS, originally developed by (Geerligs et al., 2021) detect neural state transitions in fMRI data, worked in Mariola et al. (2022) adaptation on EEG analysis, it did not fit our data structure and plan of data processing. In our fMRI-based analysis we worked backwards from duration estimation to accumulated salient events and then salient events' time points.

The work of Baldassano et al. (2017), investigates how humans segment continuous experiences, how it is segmented into events, and retrieval from memory. What makes this study unique is the use of different datasets when testing event segmentation, each designed specifically to test one area of event segmentation and memory. In the first experiment, the authors tested event segmentation and free recall in healthy participants, by watching a 50 minutes long of BBC's TV series "Sherlock", later, they were asked to recall what they watched, all while being under fMRI scan. This is similar to our experiment – to some extent – except we did not measure BOLD changes in the sensory cortex during recalling stage (Baldassano et al., 2017). Perhaps one of the most important findings revealed in this study is the event boundary × memory encoding evidence. Although our analysis did not explore or reveal details of this interaction, due to time limitations, we certainly think it is an area we plan to explore in the near future. After all, within the EST framework, what "sticks" correspond to what "violates" predictions, and figuring out the "what" held significant importance to the body of our work, and served as an experimental playground for future projects in perception and memory.

# 7.3 Known issues and possible improvements
While the results shown in section 6.5 are encouraging, there is certainly room for improvement and further investigation. We now believe that our NLP analysis alone is not enough to capture differences between descriptions of event-boundaries and non-event gaps, and that it should be accompanied by confidence ratings to capture and compare confidence levels across participants. On a larger scale, collecting information about age, country of origin, and mothers'-tongue language would provide insights into effect of language and culture on event perception and memory. The effect of language on event perception and memory has attracted sustained attention because different languages represent aspects of event structure differently (J. M. Zacks, 2020). Age, is another factor, we overlooked in our study. Older adults (particularly those with dementia) also performed less well on the memory tests. Moreover, those older adults who segmented less well also remembered less (Kurby & Zacks, 2008). In another study by Kurby and Zacks, (2018), participants first watched movies of everyday activities, then segmented them into events, and then performed memory tests. Results revealed older adults' event comprehension was similar to the smaller younger adult comparison sample. They had worse fine – but not coarse – segmentation agreement.

Lastly, while we attempted to generate a baseline using machine generated models (LLMs), we admit that we failed to generate a solid baseline for comparison. The resource demanding process of predicting the next token based on video frames requires more compute and took a lot of time running locally. Additionally, generated text results were mixed due to context-agnostic model. We think, a better approach, would be running a context-dependent model on a dedicated cloud compute, that can process our own scenario-based video frames for training, and then predicting juxtaposed scenarios to predict scenes at event-boundaries and non-event gaps.
